In this project, you will work in self-forming groups of 2-3 students to reproduce **and extend** an experiment from a published research article. The primary goals of this project are to (1) provide you with a hands-on understanding of how behavioral and social science experiments are performed; (2) show you, in a way that no homework assignment can, the complexity and joy of doing real experimental work; (3) provide a new understanding on how key social or behavioral theories and findings are relevant to modern Tech and Connective Media environments; and (4) expose you to the [challenges of scientific progress and the idea of reproducibilityLinks to an external site.](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41562-018-0399-z).

The steps to the project are available as separate assignments for submission**,** but the requirements only appear here. 

### 1) Form a group and pick a paper

Submit the [Paper Selection assignment](https://canvas.cornell.edu/courses/79092/assignments/828252) by **October 30, 11:59pm** and attach a PDF of the selected paper. You will receive a go-ahead approving your paper selection by **November 7th**. 

Other than the PDF of the selected paper, please include **in a submission comment or a second PDF file**:

- The full names and NetIDs of group members
- The full paper citation
- [1-2 paragraphs] A brief summary of the experiment from the paper you wish to replicate. What is it testing, and what are the main independent and dependent variables?
- [1-2 sentences] Your initial idea for updating the settings of the original experiment to a technology environment (see below)

To sign up for a Replication Group on Canvas, **join, with your group members, one of the pre-created Replication Project Groups on Canvas** (follow [these instructions)Links to an external site.](https://guides.instructure.com/m/4212/l/64913-how-do-i-join-a-group-as-a-student). You should not need to create a new group, just join an empty one with your other group members. It is important that your group is finalized and everyone has signed up as a Group on Canvas *before* you submit the paper selection assignment.

Groups are minimum size of two and maximum size of three students. Groups of four are allowed by special permission from the instructor, but such groups will have to perform a replication that is significantly larger is scope (e.g. more setup like implementation/building for the experiment, or significantly more participants, or recruiting unique populations, or all of the above). Make clear in your submission how your project is different in that sense.

You should pick a paper in an area that is interesting to you. The paper should use experimental methods in an area that is closely related to the topics we covered in class. If you want to use one of the papers we directly covered in class, you will need explicit approval from the instructor. It may be better to use any of the papers *cited* from the papers, chapters, or review articles we read in class, or any other related paper. One way to choose a paper is to go back to your favorite reading (or class topic) and mine the relevant paper, or papers that cite it, for experiments or experiment ideas. For example, the works of Daniel Kahneman, Dan Ariely, and Richard Thaler which is mentioned in class are all good potential sources. Make sure to review future topics and papers that we haven’t covered yet, as well, as all the units have good potential for materials.

This paper you chose should have been published in a peer-reviewed scholarly venue. The paper should include an experiment: a treatment applied using a repeatable procedure to a subgroup of individuals. Many papers cover a set of experiments; you only need to reproduce one of the experiments described in one paper. When you submit this first part of the assignment make clear which experiment from the paper you chose. 

I strongly recommend that you think hard about the paper and the experiment you chose to replicate. When picking a paper it may be hard for you to tell if the experiment will be hard to reproduce. Make sure you think about it and consult the teaching staff if necessary. I recommend choosing a paper where the experiment is well-defined and well-articulated. Beyond the papers we read in class, you can find some ideas in other online resources. The [Reproducibility ProjectLinks to an external site.](https://osf.io/ezcuj/wiki/home/) has a list of completed projects, and Gilad Feldman offers [a list of replication targetsLinks to an external site.](https://mgto.org/pre-registered-replications/) and inspiration. It is ok to pick an experiment that was already replicated (ideally, if the replication was successful!), partially because you are asked to slightly modify it. A good guideline is to pick a well-cited paper, e.g. a paper cited at least 250 times on Google Scholar. It does not guarantee quality but will rule out some lower-quality work. 

You are allowed, and encouraged, to simplify the experiment you are replicating. For example, if the experiment includes more than two conditions, you may pick for your replication the two that are more interesting, or show the most significant differences in the original experiment. 

Finally, you are asked to **update the context or the content of the original experiment to a technology environment**: AI chatbots; mobile devices; social media sites; communication technologies; online platforms; internet of things; AR/VR; etc. Make sure you pick an experiment that could be easily transferred to a new setting, or can be applied to questions involving technology. It is also possible to pick an experiment that was already done in a tech-related context or environment, as long as you somewhat extend it, change the context/setting, or even re-do it in similar settings (e.g. if the original paper is older).

This step of forming a group is *not* part of your grade but an incomplete or late assumption will result in points deducted from your final replication project grade. 

### 2) Submit your plan for approval

Submit the [experiment plan assignment](https://canvas.cornell.edu/courses/79092/assignments/828253) by **November 13th, 11:59pm** to get the full plan approved. Approval is expected by November 21st. Your project proposal must be written in a structured format including each of the following elements:

- Citation information for the paper you want to reproduce, and link to the paper
- A short explanation for why your group picked this paper
- A brief summary of the experiment described that you wish to replicate. Make sure to also include: the hypothesis, the sampling/recruitment used, the size of the sample, the treatment(s), dependent and independent variables, and how they were measured.
- An explanation of how you will transform the experiment into a new technological environment or otherwise make it relevant to technology.
- An example, using mock data, of the figures you will include in your final report, illustrating your hypothesis. These are one or more figures that demonstrate the outcome of your experiment. For example, you can show histograms of the values of the dependent variable for different experimental conditions, or a scatter plot of data points where the axes are the dependent (Y) and independent (X) variables. Explain the figures (see note below on how to write about figures).

All of these elements should together be 800 words or less.

This plan submission is 15% of the final project grade. 

### 3) Reproduce the experiment

You will need to get final approval for your experiment by running it with one of the TAs as a participant *before you recruit any real (non-test) participants* **and before December 8th, 2025 5:00pm**. You need to coordinate the time with the TA or join one of the announced TA office hours to do that.

Follow the steps described in the experiment to reproduce the study as carefully and as accurately as possible. A few guidelines:

- Most critically, make sure to do your experiment in a safe environment, online or offline. In-person experiments are allowed, but make sure to follow reasonable safety precautions with participants. 
- Per the comment above, try to limit your replication to two experimental conditions (or one control and one treatment); if the experiment and paper you picked call for more, and you cannot decide which ones to keep, talk to the teaching team.
- Make sure to have at least 20 participants (10 in each condition) and no more than 30 in total in your experiment. If you think you need to have more participants, talk to the teaching team.
- Recruiting is hard: participants don’t just “show up”. Start early. You can start recruiting before your experiment gets final approval. 
- DO NOT email the entire campus or even all Cornell Tech students asking for participants. Find other ways to recruit that would not result in an excessive load on the inboxes of too many people. 
- There is no budget to pay participants. If your sampling is not the best as a result, that’s fine.
- Experiments are often time-consuming: depending on the setup, processing each subject may take a long time. Start early.
- Feel free to change the experimental manipulation in a way that is meaningful but still likely to generate results, if you are interested in doing that. Make sure you note it in your proposal.
- It is possible to use online platforms like Prolific to recruit individuals; we will not be able to reimburse for costs, though.

This final report submission is 75% of the final project grade. The grading rubric for the final assignment is below.

 

### 4) Final Presentations

Selected and volunteer groups will be invited to present their experiment plan and initial findings in class **on December 8th**. A presentation grade given to these groups can only improve their assignment grade: their *final report grade* will be computed as:

```
 max([score for final report], 20% * [report presentation] + 80% * [final report])
```

Groups will also receive feedback about the presentation which may help improve the final report. 

At least 2 members from the group should be present in-person for the presentation, and the group should have finished all data collection and analysis by then. 

We have time in class for a maximum of about 10-12 presentations. If we have more groups volunteer, we will invite the top experiment plan submissions (by grade) and a random set of other groups to present. These presentations must be between 3-5 minutes. Here are the components we expect to see:

\- Background: some background on the importance of the research question
\- Methods: the details of how you set up your experiment and what you changed from the original for the tech adaptation
\- Results: results including the key figures you plan to include in your writeup
\- Discussion: notes about findings and the limitations (e.g. validity threats) and implications for technology

 

### 5) Final Report

Write up your experiment report by 11:59pm on December 15th, to be submitted to this assignment. Please write it in [MediumLinks to an external site.](https://medium.com/) or [SubstackLinks to an external site.](https://substack.com/)-style prose and language style (i.e. as if you are writing a blog post about your work to a popular audience) and submit a PDF document. In about 1500 total words (not strictly enforced), provide:

- The summary of your project and experiment including the main research question, the key experimental treatment, and the key measured variables. Make sure to refer to (and cite) the original experiment/paper in doing so. 
- A description of the experimental procedure as you performed it. Include illustrations and screenshots as needed. 
- A description of the recruiting technique used and a short summary of the participant characteristics.
- Summary statistics that summarize the main results of your experiment.
- One or more figures demonstrating the outcome of your experiment. For example, histograms of the values of the dependent variable for different experimental conditions, or a scatter plot of data points where the axes are the dependent (Y) and independent (X) variables. See the note below on how to write about the figures in your paper.
- A paragraph summarizing the results, including whether your hypothesis was confirmed. Note: it is perfectly acceptable (and in many cases expected) for your findings to not show the same pattern as the original experiment. In other words, negative results are ok -- that is exactly why replications are important to counter the [positive result biasLinks to an external site.](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Publication_bias) in academic publications. 
- Takeaways and reflections on the project. For example, you can reflect on what novel findings your results offer; on reasons why your results were not as expected or predicted (e.g., the original paper's results were not replicated); or on challenges/limitations in your experiment procedure (recruiting, design, measurement) that may have impacted your results.

There does not need to be any new theory or literature review in this document. It should, however, refer to the original study and its methods/findings as mentioned above.

Robust statistical data analysis is also not required. For this assignment, descriptive statistics are enough; don’t worry about p-values and statistical significance. However, you should include figures (e.g. histograms, scatter plots) and descriptive statistics that indicate whether your experiment produced the hypothesized results or not.

This final report submission is 75% of the final project grade. The grading rubric for the final assignment is below.

 

### Summary of Important Deadlines:

- Oct 30 11:59pm: Form a group and choose a paper (feedback by Nov 7th).
- November 13 11:59pm: Submit the full experiment plan (feedback by Nov 21st). 
- November 24: Feedback and discussion in class
- November 30 (suggested): Deadline to finish implementation/special setup if needed and run your experiments with the TA to get final approval. 
- Dec 1rd-5th (suggested): Finish data collection (experiment execution)
- Dec 8th Last day to test-run the experiment with TA as participant to get final approval.
- Dec 8th (optional) Presentations 
- Dec 15 11:59pm: Final Report due

 

### Other Notes / Resources

#### Online Experiment Resources

- If your plan involves a simple online experiment, you may be able to program it using [Qualtrics](https://it.cornell.edu/qualtrics), an online survey/experiment tool that is offered free by Cornell at the page linked here
- For any online experiments, you can recruit participants in any way you'd like; e.g. via your own social network, mailing list (do not spam!), and other outlets. However, feel free to use online services like [ProlificLinks to an external site.](https://www.prolific.co/) or [Amazon Mechanical TurkLinks to an external site.](https://www.mturk.com/ ) if you want to recruit more broadly. Running such a study on these platforms with 40-50 participants should be fairly cheap, and we will not be able to reimburse you except for perhaps groups that have a solid, feasible, and interesting replication plan (email Prof. Mor with details).

#### Examples from Previous Years

Here are three examples of solid replication projects from the last few years. The student groups approved sharing of these projects, but, of course, do not share any of these publicly. Note that these projects are good, but they may not be *perfect.* Also, since the instructions above changed this year, when in doubt follow the instructions rather than these examples.

[replication project example 1.pdf](https://canvas.cornell.edu/courses/79092/files/13197633?wrap=1)



[replication project example 2.pdf](https://canvas.cornell.edu/courses/79092/files/13197652?wrap=1)



[replication project example 3.pdf](https://canvas.cornell.edu/courses/79092/files/13197629?wrap=1)



 

#### Using code and text from others

If you need to write code or use any other experimental materials for your project, you are welcome to use code written by other people, including snippets of code you find online and code written by people who are helping you. However, if you *are* using code from other sources, that must be acknowledged in your submission. There is no impact on the grade: this project focuses on the replication and experimental concepts, not engineering.

In your writing, however, you should *not* use someone else's ideas or sentences without clear and visible attribution. Sometimes there may be a gray area -- if you are in doubt, you should attribute the source. 

#### Using AI Tools such as ChatGPT

You are allowed to use AI/ChatGPT to help with the content but make sure to minimize use of text that was written by AI. See the [main syllabus](https://canvas.cornell.edu/courses/79092) for the AI policy, and in particular note the style comment. The quality of the text presentation is part of your evaluation, and we will deduct points for poor style or canned AI-like language (as well as the other issues listed in the syllabus). Use your own words. 

 

#### Ethics and Review

[What is an IRB](https://researchservices.cornell.edu/resources/irb-faqs)? IRB is the acronym for Institutional Review Board for Human Participants. Any institution that receives federal funding to conduct research with human participants, such as Cornell University, is required to establish an IRB to review all research that directly or indirectly involves human participants, and to set forth institutional policy governing such research.

Note that according to Cornell's IRB guidelines, the experiments you will run do not need to be approved by the IRB, but the way you would use these results would be severely limited: "If the project is to be used in classroom setting only to teach research methods, the project may not constitute human participant research. However, this means that at no point during or after the conclusion of the course can the results or the data be used for publication, presentation or other research purposes."

If you are interested in following up with your experiment and study to pursue a publication, presentation or other research purposes, you should try to submit an IRB request; make sure to discuss this with the teaching team before you take any action. The deadline for doing so is October 14th.

Above all, IRB or not, when you run your experiment, be fair and reasonable, and **don’t be weird**.

 

#### How to Explain Figures in your Writeup

Whenever you include a figure in a document (or presentation!) make sure to: (1) refer to the figure (2) say what it demonstrates (short) (3) say what the data that is used to produce it (4) explain axis (5) pick a particular point and explain it and (6) summarize the takeaway: what does the figure show (longer). A *made-up* example: "Figure 2 depicts the divergent characteristics of TikTok use by male and female users. The data is from the 2022 TikTok dataset published by [citation here]. The chart compares the categories of videos uploaded by male and female TikTok users (on the X-axis). The Y-axis captures the count of videos in each of these categories. For example, the leftmost bars shows that male users in the data uploaded an average of 21 videos in the "dance" category, while female users averaged 43 such videos. The figure suggests that while male users are slightly more active in music video uploads, they upload much fewer dance and political videos than female users."

 

#### Final Assignment Grading Rubric

Assignment sections:

- The summary of the project and relation to the original experiment: can a reader understand what you set out to do and why?
- Quality and clarity of description of the procedure: can a reader understand what you did and how?
- Data presentation including figures and explanations: can a reader understand what you found and whether it lends support to your hypothesis?
- Quality and substance of the discussion, takeaways

Overall:

- Overall quality of replication, and adaptation of the original experiment to technology
- Overall clarity of writing, presentation
- Bonus for presentation (for presentation groups)